Add a retrospective KEP for Custom Resource Definitions. (#833)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-api-machinery/2019-02-13-custom-resource-definitions.md

participating-sigs:
  - sig-architecture
reviewers:
  - "@bgrant0607"
  - "@smarterclayton"
  - "@lavalamp"
  - "@deads2k"
approvers:
  - "@lavalamp"
  - "@smarterclayton"
  - TBD
editor: TBD
creation-date: "2013-02-13"
last-updated: "2013-02-13"
status: implemented
---

# Custom Resource Definitions

## Summary

This KEP covers the addition and usage of Custom Resource Definitions. This KEP is different than most KEPs
because it is an attempt to retrospectively describe the development of a feature in Kubernetes that 
already exists. We are doing this because custom resource definitions were created and evolved before the
KEP process was put in place. Because of this, there is no single place that describes the reasons for
custom resource definitions and how they should be used in Kubernetes.

## Motivation

The primary motivation for custom resources was to provide a simple easy to use extension mechanism
for Kubernetes clusters to enable customization by Kubernetes users and to facilitate a rich
ecosystem of plugins for Kubernetes clusters. If Kubernetes is the kernel, CustomResourceDefinitions
are intended to be loadable kernel modules.

### Goals

>    * Provide an easy to use mechanism for the dynamic addition of new API types to Kubernetes.

Reviewer: What I miss: It should not be observable whether a resource is a CustomResources or natively implemented (other than looking at the CRD objects). In other words: same semantics as native resources.

   * Develop tooling for managing the installation ordering or dependencies of custom resources. This is deferred to other KEPs.
   * Expressing or managing inheritance, referential integrity, or other inter-object relationships.
   * Document how to create a custom resource definition. This is done [elsewhere](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/access-kubernetes-api/custom-resources/custom-resource-definitions/)

## Implementation History

Third-party resources were originally [proposed](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/11781) 
shortly after Kubernetes 1.0. At the time it was clear that making the Kubernetes API server
extensible was critical to the long-term health of the project and there were two different
approaches for extension proposed:
   * Plugin resources (initial "ThirdPartyResource" eventually "CustomResourceDefinitions")
   * Delgation to an "aggregated API server"

ThirdPartyResources were added to the API server, but the API server was actually really not ready
for them, much of the dynamic discovery and grouping mechanisms were primitive, or non-existent.

> As a result, and because there was little initial support from the core API machinery maintainers

Reviewer 2: I think some people would tell the story a little differently :)

No matter how it's told, this isn't a good sort of story to have in this document.

I would just say TPRs were an inexpensive experiment, finished just enough to be useful, and we learned a lot from them.

Reviewer 3: > I would just say TPRs were an inexpensive experiment, finished just enough to be useful, and we learned a lot from them.

Agree.

for ThirdPartyResources, the feature languished with bugs, inconsistencies and missing functionality.

Despite this, ThirdPartyResources gained popularity, especially with the development of the Operator
pattern by CoreOS. This usage lead to many bug fixes and proving out the model as a viable method for

> developing a rich ecosystem of APIs.

Reviewer 4: There was a moment around Feb 2017 when the API Machinery community was trying to decide whether to continue to focus effort on Aggregated API Servers, or to shift effort to TPRs/CRDs.  The community decided on  the latter.  [Here is one of the documents that, at least for me, worked through this decision.](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1y16jKL2hMjQO0trYBJJSczPAWj8vAgNFrdTZeCincmI/edit)

When it became clear that ThirdPartyResources were not only viable, but actually the predominant way

> to extend the Kubernetes API Server. Core API Machinery maintainers renamed ThirdPartyResources to

Reviewer 2: If we want to be very technical, it was a ground-up rewrite, not a rename; they both existed side-by-side for a release or two. I think this amount of historical detail would go better in a postmortem than a KEP; again, others would write it differently.

Reviewer 5: Another way to put it would be that CRDs are a v2 based on lessons learned via the TPR experiment.

Reviewer 6: I believe that at the time there was a desire rework TPRs, but it was already at v1beta1 and thus a stable API; that's why there had to be a new name.

CustomResourceDefinitions and rewrote most of the core code to improve it's compatability and
integration with a significantly more mature API server.

At this point, the core CustomResource mechanisms have matured to a point where there is discussion
about how to build out core required APIs as custom resources (see below).

## Proposal

### User Stories

#### Story 1: Easy extensibility

Alice is a developer who runs her own Kubernetes cluster. Alice mostly deploys Java applications. One
day Alice thinks: "Instead of always using Kubernetes `Deployment` objects, I'd like to create a `JavaDeployment` object that abstracts lots of the boilerplate of the `PodTemplate` inside the `Deployment`
object into a `JavaPodTemplate` that knows how to run Java applications.

Alice uses CustomResourceDefinitions and a simple controller and extends her cluster to have 
`JavaDeployments` in a single afternoon.

#### Story 2: Lightweight cluster add-ons

> Jane is a cluster adminstrator. Here users are hopeless at deploying and managing certificates as

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Jane is a cluster administrator. Her users are hopeless at deploying and managing certificates as
```

Secrets in Kubernetes. Jane wants to add a `RotatingSecret` which uses the API Server's signing 

> capabilities to automatically rotate certificates for her users. Jane fines an open source project

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
capabilities to automatically rotate certificates for her users. Jane finds an open source project
```

that has this capability, and Jane installs the extension into the clusters she administers without
worrying about extra storage components that she needs to monitor and manage.

#### Story 3: An ecosystem of plugin providers.

Julia is running a startup. She wants to make it easy for the world to perform XSS testing against
their websites. Julia builds a custom piece of software that does XSS attacks, and also builds a
`XSSDetector` custom resource. Julia can build her business based on people installing her software
as an extension inside of their Kubernetes clusters no matter where they are running.

### Implementation details

For details of how to use `CustomResourceDefinitions` there is excellent documentation [elsewhere](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/access-kubernetes-api/custom-resources/custom-resource-definitions/).

### Patterns for Custom Resources

> There are three main patterns for custom resources, ordered in complexity from simplest to most complex:

Reviewer 3: I think you're missing workload controller type APIs.  I see an operator as having detailed knowledge about what it's creating for determining things like health and resource or version dependencies, but you can use CRDs to create new workload resource types if our stock ones do not work.

Reviewer 5: @deads2k Would those new workload resources fall under the operator model?

   * Dumb data objects
   * Compiler patterns
   * Operator patterns

#### Dumb data objects

Dumb data objects are the simplest use case for CustomResourceDefinitions. In this case, the resource
is simply used for CRUD operations. A user might create an object with `kubectl` and an application
might read that object in when it starts and periodically resynchronize that data during it's operation.

> The object is used only for data storage, there is no control-plane machinery running in the cluster.

Reviewer 5: In the non-goals it's noted that:

> Develop an arbitrary key-value store for applications. Custom resources are control-plane objects. 

Does the dumb data object details act more like a key-value store for an app? This notes there  is no control-plane part. Is this case a non-goal?

> #### Compiler Patterns

Reviewer 3: This seems like an MVP operator.  Why would we separately document it?

backups if all Pods in the StatefulSet fail. 

### Open Questions

#### Dependency management

If truly core APIs are developed as custom resources, then there can be dependency issues when
bootstrapping a Kubernetes cluster. If core components (e.g. the controller manager) needs to manage
a custom resource, how do you ensure that the resource gets created before the controller-manager
starts, when the controller-manager itself is in the lifecycle for custom resources. We need to untangle
these circular dependencies. And ensure that people who write such controllers, write them in such a
way that they can temporarily handle the resources they manage not existing.

Another significant concern in dependency management is dependencies between custom resource definitions.
As the ecosystem of plugins becomes richer, the chances that one plugin will depend on another increases.
Currently there is no good way to express that in order for CustomResource `A` to work correctly, 
CustomResource `B` needs to be installed as well.

#### Version upgrades

Another open question for CustomResources is version management. Currently there are no built-in practices

> for moving from one version of a CustomResource to another. To do such a migration, the tool itself would

Reviewer 2: Hm? They are in alpha right now?

> have to perform the schema migration by reading all of the data objects in the old version and rewriting

Reviewer 3: This doesn't seem correct.  We have a tool in progress to do this with a straight read/write cycle.

Reviewer 8: repo: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kube-storage-version-migrator
KEP [1](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-api-machinery/0030-storage-migration.md) and [2](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-api-machinery/storage-migration-auto-trigger.md).

> them in the new version. To make this successful , at the very least we will need to provide the ability to

Reviewer 2: This is a strangely specific detail for a document at this level of abstraction; also we haven't found it necessary in any of the version upgrade work yet. I would omit this.

> mark a CustomResource as "read-only" to ensure that there isn't skew between the two representations.

Reviewer 9: Should conversion webhooks be mentioned here, or is that out of scope for this doc?

We may need to invest significantly more heavily in this space to make it easy for users to upgrade or 
update their objects. For now, most users have simply chosen not to upgrade the version.

### Risks and Mitigations

#### DDOS or other attacks on storage

Because custom resources share the same storage as the core API types, there is risk that either via 

> requests/second or storage space usage, custom resources will become deliberate or inadvertent denial

Reviewer 2: CR storage can be directed to a separate etcd cluster if necessary, I believe. @mbohlool to confirm.

Reviewer 3: > CR storage can be directed to a separate etcd cluster if necessary, I believe. @mbohlool to confirm.

I don't recall wiring it to allow that in bulk.

Reviewer 5: FWIW, I've seen someone accidentally DDOS themselves with CRs. If it's not extremely easy, most users would never use a separate etcd even if it's an option.

of service attacks on a cluster. Currently there is a maximum size cap for custom resources, but it is
a pretty limited defense against these sorts of concerns. This makes the installation of a custom
resource a very privileged action for a cluster.

#### Custom resource adminstration

For many reasons, installing a new custom resource is a privileged action for a cluster adminstrator.
However, this significantly increases the complexity of developing a Custom Resource. Ideally the

> resource itself would install itself into the cluster when it's controller is run as a Pod, but

Reviewer 2: s/it's/its/

> resource itself would install itself into the cluster when it's controller is run as a Pod, but

Reviewer 3: Given global discovery and cross namespace list/watch (as our apiserver operates), I don't agree with this statement.  The choice to add a schema'd object is privileged and affects the experience for the entire cluster.

Reviewer 5: There is also the case where more than one controller is using the same CRD and they may have slightly different versions of it at the same CRD version. We can say people shouldn't do that but they already are doing it (e.g., updated descriptions or validations). This makes automation complicated.

because you don't want to grant the controller the general ability to create arbitrary CustomResources,
it is generally the case that the controller won't have proper permissions to create a resource. 

> In the future we may want to develop some sort of "single use token" or some equivalent such that custom resources are easy to install, and yet don't require cluster adminstrator privileges to bootstrap themselves.

Reviewer 2: We definitely have the goal of making them easy, but not necessarily in that way. The fundamental problem isn't that it's hard to give permissions (that's easy to fix), it's that you shouldn't give permissions to folks who lack the full context of what the cluster is used for. :(

Giving folks their own sandboxed apiserver or section of apiserver is one approach that's been discussed on the mailing lists, but it's a lot of work.

Reviewer 5: Can anyone have a full context of what a cluster is used for? A cluster admin may know about Kubernetes but they aren't likely to understand all the apps, controllers, and other things running in a cluster along with what they are doing. In a cluster of a moderate size or in an organization with various loosely connected teams using it, can anyone know the full context?

Reviewer 2: > Can anyone have a full context of what a cluster is used for?

It is reasonable for some clusters, less for others.

The harder it is to know the full context, the more important it is to be careful about tweaking global bits (e.g., installing CRDs).

> In the future we may want to develop some sort of "single use token" or some equivalent such that custom resources are easy to install, and yet don't require cluster adminstrator privileges to bootstrap themselves.

Reviewer 3: If developed, a single-use token would not be special for a CRD.  I don't think such a token here is a good idea.

## Graduation Criteria

> This work has already graduated.

Reviewer 2: To beta.

## Drawbacks

To become full-fledged API objects CustomResources require extensive usage of webhooks for various API 
object lifecycle events (e.g. validation, defaulting, etc). This pattern means that the code for an custom 
resource can be splattered around in various callbacks and as such can be harder to understand.

Likewise, all types of APIs may not be implementable (or easily implementable) as custom resources because
of this limitation.

## Alternatives

Aggregated API Servers where requests are delegated from the API server to an delegate API server

> are a more flexible (though more complicated) alternative to custom resource definitions.

Reviewer 2: They are more complex for users to make use of, but they are actually a much simpler mechanism--we took them to GA without difficulty, CRDs have been much more work.

Reviewer 5: @lavalamp so, they are more complicated for users, right? I wonder what this would all look like if API Servers were easier for users to use?

Reviewer 2: If we made apiservers super easy to produce, we would likely have a major compatibility problem at upgrade time. CRDs are lower maintenance for users. I think this is a fairly fundamental difference: apiservers run a full stack. CRDs only need to change if you evolve your API; apiservers need to change with the Kubernetes version.

Reviewer 2: (As Brian would say, "Aggregated apiservers are for *us*. We need them to build Kubernetes.")

Reviewer 10: API aggregation was used to implement CRDs. The original use case was an API with a non-etcd backend (core metrics API). API aggregation, which reached GA in 1.10, was also simpler to achieve full functionality.

Reviewer 11: Separate etcd storage is an even more critical concern for apiservers than it is for CRs, might be worth mentioning it as a risk.
